Title: Entropy, management, and xkcd 927
Date: 2022-05-07
Slug: entropy
Summary: As a manager, don’t try to negotiate with the laws of physics.
Tags: Work, Communications

[xkcd 927](https://xkcd.com/927/) is a modern internet classic that is
frequently brought up in conversations to remind people that a proposal
that they’re making will, while being intended to simplify things,
actually make them more complicated.

Most people quote that strip to satirize or even ridicule the idea of
introducing a “15th standard”, as if the natural order of things was
simplification. Such people are frequently baffled by the amount of
cruft and clutter that accumulates over time in an organization they
work in, and some of them embark on a constant — perhaps career-long —
quest of “streamlining,” “process optimization,” or “reducing
technical debt.”

If you are one such person, please get ready for some bad news.

As far as we know, there are three fundamental theories that,
combined, explain the universe as we know it: [general
relativity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_relativity),
[quantum mechanics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_mechanics),
and
[thermodynamics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermodynamics). Thermodynamics
has a famous [Second
Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_law_of_thermodynamics) that
can be stated in various ways — in one modern and simplified form, we
say:

> The total entropy of a system never decreases.

“Entropy,” in this context, is [essentially the degree to which the
system is
disorderly](https://openstax.org/books/physics/pages/12-3-second-law-of-thermodynamics-entropy).
In effect, the Second Law states that any system can stay just as
orderly as it is now, or it can become more disorderly, but in can
never again become as orderly as it once was. **The normal state of
the world is that things keep getting more and more disorderly.**

There are multiple classic examples of this: you can mix two paints in
a bucket but cannot unmix them, you can open a container of gas in a
vacuum chamber and the gas will disperse but never go back into the
container, you can scramble and cook and egg but never return it to
its original protein structure.

Sometimes the growth in entropy isn’t noticeable: you can of course
pick up your cluttered desk and put everything neatly away in boxes or
drawers (or the trash), and your office will look nice and clean and
uncluttered thereafter. But, in the process you will have turned so
much of your body’s energy into heat that the overall disorder in the
“system” (consisting of the things in your office, the room, you, all
the gas molecules in the air, and so forth) will have gone up quite
considerably.

Now, I realize that not all laws of physics can be directly applied on
a macro scale, that is, to organizations, families, or societies. For
example, you’ll have to go through various mind-bends to imagine your
life as a path through gazillions of [Everettian many-worlds
bifurcations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Many-worlds_interpretation).
But I’d posit that the constant growth of entropy is indeed rather
fundamental — after all, growth in entropy is one of our best
definitions of the [passage of
time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrow_of_time#Thermodynamic_arrow_of_time).
Escaping the growth of entropy is literally just as impossible as
stopping time.

What does that mean for each of us, individually? It means, bluntly
speaking, that our lives get objectively and perpetually messier over
time. I don’t know if you’re in a better or worse place than you were
10 or 20 years ago in your life, but I’m pretty sure that you’re in a
more *complicated* place now. And many of us might probably *want* to
go back to our less-complicated life from back then, but alas,
backwards time travel (and hence entropy reduction, read: “a more
orderly life”) is not an option.

Now as long as you’re just trying (and failing) to rewind disorder in
your own life, then — as long as you live and work alone — that will
probably not have a harmful effect on anyone. But it gets tricky when
you’re applying the same thinking to living with a spouse, or in a
family. Good luck trying to rewind your life with teenage offspring,
for example, to the presumably simpler time when they were three month
old babies that slept most of the day.

But let’s also talk about how this affects your work in a management
position.

**If you are a manager, it is your job to slow the growth of disorder
in your part of the organization.** You won’t be able to *reduce*
disorder, and any attempt to do so pits you against a most fundamental
law of physics. (Laws of physics are like terrorists: you shouldn’t
attempt to negotiate with them.) However, many managers are exactly
the opposite: they are entropy accelerators; they *speed up* the
growth of disorder in the organization.

You can do better than that.[^hadfield] Here are a few suggestions you
can apply when dealing with your management peers, so you can act as
your organization’s entropy decelerator.

[^hadfield]: Making a positive contribution to a group in a leadership
    role is frequently — and somewhat counter-intuitively — achieved
    by simply focusing on not making things worse for
    everyone. Canadian astronaut and former
    [ISS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Space_Station)
    commander [Chris
    Hadfield](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Hadfield) calls this
    approach “aiming to be a zero” and dedicates a whole chapter in
    his excellent [Astronaut’s Guide to Life on
    Earth](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18170143-an-astronaut-s-guide-to-life-on-earth)
    to this idea.

* Somebody wants to replace multiple existing things with one new
  thing (the original xkcd 927 scenario): the only circumstance under
  which you should agree to this is when you already know *for
  certain* that the existing things must go away, within a manageable
  timeframe. For example, the software solutions that your company has
  been buying from one vendor have had such a massive price hike that
  they now break the budget, or the legal ramifications of continuing
  to use them have become untenable. That’s when you have an option of
  possibly replacing two (or three) things with one. Under all other
  circumstances, you can hope to replace one thing with one other, at
  best.

* Somebody wants to solve a communications issue by adding more
  channels to your company chat, more categories to your issue
  tracker, more whatever? That’s your cue to stop that dead in its
  tracks. Opening more lanes of communication never simplifies
  anything; it always makes things more complicated. Those new chat
  channels? Tit for tat. They want three new ones, so they must retire
  three. No, not two. Three.

* Somebody wants to “open up team communications”, or “flatten the
  organization”, so that everyone’s [complete
  graph](%7Bfilename%7Dflat-org-scaling.md) has way more edges?
  That’s when you educate them about ${n(n-1)}\over 2$, and what
  quadratic growth means.

Do you notice how **a lot of these involve saying “no” to someone,**
and that that may place you at odds with the the well-meaning
proponent? Congratulations on your realization that leadership is not
a popularity contest among your management colleagues.

One word of caution though: even if you fight this good fight — and
trust me, it *is* a good fight — you will *still* occasionally look
back at when you started working in your organization, and realize
that despite all your efforts it’s a messier place than when you
started. Not just the whole organization, but maybe even your own team
or whatever your little corner of the corporate world is. The part
where *you* are responsible for your part of the mess.

This is especially true if you are just in the middle of leaving an
organization (or a role therein), and are reflecting on the impact of
your tenure: you might fall for the thought of “I tried really hard,
but things still are messier than when I got here.” They always will
be. The point is not to compare today’s degree of disorder to that
when you started. The point is to compare how disorderly it is now, to
how disorderly it would have been if you hadn’t been there.
